The Joe Rogan experience.
Have any of the people that were initially skeptical or pushing back against the
idea that it came from this level four lab?
Are they coming around or are they still digging.
Their heels in? So some are, are, are coming around. And, um,
so certainly there are people like, uh, like Matt Ridley,
who's a member of the house of, in the,
in the UK kind of very well known science communicator.
He was firmly on the other side and now he started to be more open
and actually has been quite, uh, quite vocal.
What was his motivation for being on the other side? Did he, yeah,
I think that in.
The,
it's a really interesting story because in the earliest days a pandemic,
there was a concerted effort by a relatively small number of high
profile, uh, scientists, virologists who recognized, um,
that if the story was that this came from a series of what are called zoonotic
jumps between animal hosts in, in the wild, that was going to lead to kind of a,
that have outcome where we'd say, Hey,
let's be very mindful of our encroachment into wild spaces, climate change,
all those things that we should be very mindful of, but they were,
I think probably worried, um,
that if this story became dominant of an accidental lab leak, I mean,
that would have huge implications for all of the research that people are doing.
And, and a is, is very well intentioned. So early last year, um,
there was a process where a series of, uh, of scientists did two things. One,
they came out with a letter in the, in the British, uh, medical journal Lancet,
which we've subsequently learned was highly manipulated by a small number of
people who may have had vested interests. And there was a, a,
a academic paper and a journal called nature communications and both made the
case, oh, this isn't a lab leak.
And then there was a concerted effort to label anybody else as a
conspiracy theorist. And so I,
I kind of spent last year in that uncomfortable space. I mean, I,
I, I don't live my life as a conspiracy theorist.
I try to be data driven in everything that I do,
but I really felt that this was a very real possibility and it deserved a
full investigation. And it was only in the beginning of this year, uh,
2021, that that started to turn. I know I had, uh,
I wrote some things, uh, uh, someone named Nick Nichol and BAK.
He had a great piece in New York magazine. Um,
the wall street journal did a great job, um, covering this. And so the,
the space was starting to, to open up. Then they had that really in my mind,
ill faded press event in Wuhan where it was this independent committee and
the Chinese government. And they said, don't invest,
investigate lab lake investigate the frozen food hypothesis.
And then in every newspaper around the world,
the headline was the world health organization, um, says, uh,
don't lab. Lake is not, is not possible essentially.
And so I immediately sent messages to my, my friends, uh,
at the world health organization and saying, look you,
this is being misreported, the world health organization, hasn't said this, uh,
and the, the position of the w H O must be,
we have to investigate all hypotheses.
And I was very pleased that three days later,
so the press event was on a Tuesday that Friday, uh, Ted rose adeno,
who's the director general. He then, uh,
said an press event that we believe that every hypothesis needs to be
investigated, which implicitly meant the lab league hypothesis.
And then our letter, uh, came out, uh, which was just,
just last week. I mean, it, it feels it's been such a whirlwind since then,
and that's been picked up in newspapers all around the world.
So now I feel like there is an opening and I hope that we can continue.
And the goal in my mind, isn't to prove like, I don't,
I don't feel like I need to, maybe if it's provable, I'd love to prove it,
but is not to prove the it right at this point that it is a lab leak or isn't,
but we at least need to have the most thorough unrestricted
unpoliticized investigation into what happened with access to
all the lab records, all the samples there,
there's tons of scientists in China who were working on these issues.
Very, very few of them have been interviewed. We don't have access to them.
And frankly, I think a lot of them are afraid that if they speak up, uh,
they'll be imprisoned or.
Worse. Yeah. That is the problem. Right? The,
the people that were initially very vocal, um,
and biased towards the idea that it wasn't a lab leak.
And you said they were highly motivated and yeah, they,
they labeled other folks at conspiracy theorist. What, what was motivating them?
Yeah. So this it's a really tricky point. And,
and so there's been a lot of controversy.
I got around a guy named Peter Deza and Peter is an
interesting figure, because if you had asked me, uh, a year ago,
a year and a half ago,
who are the people who you respect most in the field of virology?
He would be really at the top of my list.
He was one of the heroes of understanding where the first SARS came from.
He has a, an organization called EcoHealth Alliance.
It was really trying to get ahead of the curve on understanding these, uh,
these pathogens,
but he all through EcoHealth Alliance was a funder of
the Wuhan Institute of virology,
specifically the gain of function research that was being done there. And I, I,
I truly believe it wasn't anything nefarious. It was, the idea was, well,
if we're, if we wanna understand dangerous pathogens,
we have to do it in the place where those day dangerous pathogens are.
Then under the Obama administration, there was a moratorium on this kind of, uh,
of, uh, of gain of function research. Um,
and then it was lifted in the Trump administration. So that's one,
one piece of it. And so for Peter,
I understand that his whole experience of his life has been well,
this is where these kinds of outbreaks come from. Um, and,
but this could be just a very different story. And, and for me personally,
that's,
I think one of the reasons why I was able to see this a little year perhaps than
other people, is that, you know,
part of big chunk of my life has been in the world of science,
but another big chunk of my life has been in the world of understanding China.
And so I think if you're just in the world of science,
you don't understand China, you think, well,
the Chinese government says that this isn't from a lab.
Like it must not be from a lab league,
but I know that the China nineties government they've totally suppressed the
entire basically history of Mau and all the beat millions of people who died
under Mau when they got their speed trains, uh,
going the first train had this terrible crash and they just buried the whole
train and, and pretended like it,
it never happened until there was outcry and they had to, they had to,
to dig it up. So I, I,
I feel like I understood a little bit more about the pathology of the, uh,
of the Chinese government. So, but coming back,
I think there were people in the kind of more traditional virology world who
felt like we're gonna open up a whole can of worms. If we say, well,
maybe it was a zoonotic jump and maybe it was, it was a lovely.
So this one guy and his influence
shaped the way the entire world was addressing this.
Outbreak. I wouldn't say it's one guy, but it was a,
I think a relatively small number of people, um,
because they certainly that the, uh, the Lancet letter,
and it was all kinds of big luminaries who signed it,
that really shaped things. Um, and so definitely if,
if the story in the beginning had been,
maybe this comes from a zoonotic jump, maybe it comes from a lab leak.
We need to look at both options. Or, um,
I think that would've been a much healthier place because there would've been
more pressure on China. So it wasn't just one guy,
but Peter certainly was, was very influential. And then in spite of this,
uh,
conflict of interest he's actually was selected as a member of this world health
organization, independent advisory committee. So one of the,
the people who went on this mission to China was Peter. He also, uh,
is the chairman of the Lancet, the same, uh, British journal that I mentioned.
They have a, a study, uh, study group. He's the chairman of that.
And I'm not saying he's doing anything wrong. I'm just saying,
if you have that kind of conflict of interest,
you shouldn't be in those kinds of roles. It's.
Just always so disturbing to someone like me.
Who's a non-scientist who relies on scientists to be unbiased.
And to just look at the data,
when you find out that things are being influenced by very human factors,
like ego and financial gain and
relationships with foreign powers and laboratories that
they're involved with, and that scares the outta me.
Well, you know, this better than most anybody, Joe,
because you kind of are here every day,
looking into people's psyche and people are people, even,
even scientists and everybody in the world has a story
that explains what they're doing and, uh, and why.
And so I'm sure that you could maybe even should have Peter on the show and
he'll give you his, his story, but at least from the outside,
looking in the way I would see it is well he's,
he's invested his entire life into doing the right thing,
trying to protect us from this terrible threat of a pathogenic outbreak.
He correctly recognizes that encroachment into wild
areas and climate change are big threats, wherever, wherever COVID, uh,
two, wherever COVID 19 SARS, two comes from still, those are, are,
are good things to do.
He has a longstanding relationship with the Wuhan Institute of virology
and a friendship with the people who, uh, who, who work there. Um,
and so you, you can see how we ki he I'm my guess. And you know,
I can't speak for him. He's become kind of a stakeholder in this story,
but we shouldn't. This isn't just about Peter. I mean,
there are lots of very prominent S so I would say there are more prominent
scientists who believe that this comes from a series of zoonotic, uh,
jumps through intermediate animal hosts in the wild than there are, uh,
who believe that it's more likely to come from a lab lake. But what I will say,
I get a lot, I'm in touch with lots of people who are world famous scientists,
scientists, who, many, many people what we'll know who are privately telling me.
Well, we think that there's a 90% chance that it comes from a lab,
but really don't wanna speak up because we don't wanna get pulled into the muck.
You were talking about Trump before people remember the Iraq war,
where there were all kinds of experts who were saying, oh,
they definitely have nuclear weapons. And then invaded country. It's like, oh,
oops, they don't have it.
So people didn't want it to justify any kind of bad things. And as scientists,
I mean, the problem is the,
the scientists rely on data and there wasn't data because China was,
was covering it up. And the,
the ch the journalists require scientists to make,
to legitimate claims about the origins.
And so there was this weird thing that's, that's lasted for a year,
and our hope is, and we're starting to see that our letter, um,
has opened up some space where we can have a real honest conversation about
let's.
Let's look deeply into all the possibilities and try to get to the right answer,
catch.
New episodes that Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips,
easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience
on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data cost. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.